Update Ubuntu desktop setup on EC2 (#332)
canonical/ubuntu-cloud-docs: aws/aws-how-to/instances/launch-ubuntu-desktop.rst

Launch an Ubuntu desktop on EC2
===============================

This is a how-to guide on how to launch an Ubuntu desktop as an EC2 instance.

It will go over launching the instance via the EC2 dashboard, and also via the AWS CLI and CloudFormation. Lastly, it shows you how to connect to the instance using RDP.

.. Note::

    To ensure that you are selecting the latest Long Term Support (LTS) or Pro version, check the `Ubuntu release notes 
    <https://releases.ubuntu.com>`_ for any updates.

Launch the instance 
-------------------

There are two different popular ways to launch the instance: using the dashboard or using AWS CLI and CloudFormation to interact with the AWS API. Select the one you are most comfortable with.

Use the EC2 dashboard
*********************

> #. On the AWS console, search for "EC2", click on it to open the dashboard. Next, click on "Launch instance". At the "Application and OS Images (Amazon Machine Image)" section, search for "Ubuntu pro", and select it.

Author: I am now familiarizing myself with the [Diataxis how-to guide](https://diataxis.fr/how-to-guides/#how-to-guides-addressed-to-problems), and in an example outlined there, they gave feedback that a user who is working in a domain - should be expected to know something while reading the guide.

This made me think twice about the sentence in this line, I'll appreciate feedback.

Should I use this instead?

```suggestion
#. To create the instance, select Ubuntu (standard or Pro edition) from the "Application and OS Images (Amazon Machine Image)" section.
```

Reviewer: Yes, the second option is more suited to a how-to guide. However, it is still useful to give context by mentioning the starting point (the AWS->EC2 console) and also to use their terminology ('Launch an instance'). So maybe something like:  

> On the EC2 console, launch an instance by selecting Ubuntu (Server or Pro edition) in the "Application and OS Images (Amazon Machine Image)" section

In fact since AMI is a very commonly used term and the section title is pretty unwieldy, we could reduce it further to:

> On the EC2 console, launch an instance by selecting an Ubuntu AMI (Server or Pro edition).

Author: Nice! I like your last suggestion.

Also, I think you meant “Standard” not “Server” right? This is because they are both servers.

Reviewer: Yeah they are both servers, but the AMIs listed on their UI have "Server" and "Pro" in their names, so I suggested that. Maybe we could just remove those options and simply say "Ubuntu AMI"? After all the user anyway has to select an appropriate version too.

Author: I agree

    * Ubuntu Pro:

      .. code-block:: bash

        aws ssm get-parameters --names /aws/service/canonical/ubuntu/pro-server/24.04/stable/current/arm64/hvm/ebs-gp3/ami-id

#. Use the AMI ID value in your CloudFormation template as shown in this `tutorial <https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/build-your-cloudformation-templates-with-the-latest-ubuntu-ami#1-overview>`_. Ensure that the AMI ID value set for the ``LatestAmiId`` parameter, is the one you retrieved from the command above.

Install Ubuntu desktop and the snap store
-----------------------------------------

There are several popular ways to access the terminal of your server:

#. Using an SSH client like PuTTY if you are running Windows
#. The ssh command executed in the terminal of your Linux, Mac, or Windows device.
#. The AWS EC2 Instance Connect feature

.. image:: ./launch-ubuntu-desktop-on-ec2/2c_Launch_instance.png

After logging into your server. Execute the commands below to install the Ubuntu desktop packages.

.. code:: bash

    sudo apt-get update && apt-get upgrade -y
    sudo apt-get install -y ubuntu-desktop
    sudo snap install snap-store --edge

>     sudo reboot

Author: I added a reboot command here because my instance suddenly lost DNS access after executing the other commands.

.. Note::

>     Don't disconnect the session after executing these commands.

Author: I also think I did not explain why they shouldn't disconnect, and this may disrupt the flow of the docs. I'd appreciate feedback here too.

```suggestion
    Don't disconnect the session after executing these commands. The installation process
    may take several minutes, and a disconnection could interrupt it.
```

Reviewer: A little bit of explanation is fine, especially when it directly helps with the step that the user is on. Like in this case, apart from giving a reason, it also lets the user know that the process may take several minutes (which is not otherwise obvious).

Author: Alright, thank you.

Launch an Ubuntu desktop on EC2
===============================

This is a how-to guide on how to launch an Ubuntu desktop as an EC2 instance.

It will go over launching the instance via the EC2 dashboard, and also via the AWS CLI and CloudFormation. Lastly, it shows you how to connect to the instance using RDP.

.. Note::

    To ensure that you are selecting the latest Long Term Support (LTS) or Pro version, check the `Ubuntu release notes 
    <https://releases.ubuntu.com>`_ for any updates.

Launch the instance 
-------------------

> There are two different popular ways to launch the instance: using the dashboard or using AWS CLI and CloudFormation to interact with the AWS API. Select the one you are most comfortable with.

Reviewer 2: there are two different popular ways, but it seems that we mention three: dashboard, AWSCL and CFT.
1. I see more often the use of EC2 Console rather than just dashboard
2. I would drop the CloudFormation reference as it could spark more doubts.

Author: Ok, thank you.

Use the EC2 dashboard
*********************

#. On the EC2 console, launch an instance by selecting an Ubuntu AMI.

    .. image:: ./launch-ubuntu-desktop-on-ec2/2a_Launch_instance.png
        

> #. The recommended hardware requirements to run an Ubuntu desktop is at least 2 CPU cores, 8GB of RAM, and 8GB of volume. However, if you intend to install additional applications, you need a higher volume size.

Reviewer 2: > 8GB of volume.
Have you tested with such a little space? Just out of curiosity.

Author: No, not yet. I had an existing 20GB volume VM, so I used it.
It'd be fun testing it with 8GB though, I'll try it and let you know if it works.

#. Configure your security group to allow SSH and RDP ports (22 and 3389 respectively).

    .. image:: ./launch-ubuntu-desktop-on-ec2/2b_Launch_instance.png

> Use the AWS CLI and CloudFormation templates

Author: Hi @carlosbravoa, I'm following up on this question.

> Use the AWS CLI and CloudFormation templates

Reviewer 2: yeah, I would leave CFT out of scope. It is true that you can launch Ubuntu via EC2 Console (Web), AWSCLI, Cloudformation and many other ways, but we don't need to cover them all. Especially CFT, as you correctly mention, it seems like an overkill. (sorry for the oversight!!!!)

> Use the AWS CLI and CloudFormation templates

Author: Alright

********************************************

#. Set up the `AWS CLI <../launch-ubuntu-ec2-instance>`_.

#. Retrieve the latest AMI ID for the EC2 instance using one of the following CLI commands:

    * Ubuntu LTS:

      .. code-block:: bash

        aws ssm get-parameters --names /aws/service/canonical/ubuntu/server/24.04/stable/current/arm64/hvm/ebs-gp3/ami-id

    * Ubuntu Pro:

      .. code-block:: bash

        aws ssm get-parameters --names /aws/service/canonical/ubuntu/pro-server/24.04/stable/current/arm64/hvm/ebs-gp3/ami-id

> #. Use the AMI ID value in your CloudFormation template as shown in this `tutorial <https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/build-your-cloudformation-templates-with-the-latest-ubuntu-ami#1-overview>`_. Ensure that the AMI ID value set for the ``LatestAmiId`` parameter, is the one you retrieved from the command above.

Author: Alright, thank you.

Install Ubuntu desktop and the snap store
-----------------------------------------

There are several popular ways to access the terminal of your server:

#. Using an SSH client like PuTTY if you are running Windows

> #. The ssh command executed in the terminal of your Linux, Mac, or Windows device.

Reviewer 2: ssh -> `ssh`

Author: Ok
